---
layout: '@/layouts/Page.astro'
title: 'The Wireless Commons'
date: '2003-03-03T08:03:00+13:00'
guid: 'http://adam.nz/?page_id=1894'
---

import Box from '../../components/Box.astro'

# The Wireless Commons

<Box background>
  <i>
    These pages were born from discussion amongst the{' '}
    <a href="http://freenetworks.org/">Free Networks</a> community and first
    published at wirelesscommons.org in 2003. The domain has long since expired
    however the original site (along with several translations) is preserved at{' '}
    <a href="https://web.archive.org/web/20120201142007/http://www.wirelesscommons.org/manifesto">
      archive.org
    </a>
    . – Adam
  </i>
</Box>

## Charter Signatories

We, the undersigned, agree to pursue and promote the goals of the wireless
commons:

<Box width="wide" columns border>
  Adam Shand (<a href="http://www.personaltelco.net/">Personal Telco</a>)
  <br />
  Bruce Potter (<a href="http://www.cawnet.org/">CAWNet</a>)
  <br />
  Paul Holman (<a href="http://www.shmoo.com/">Shmoo Group</a>)
  <br />
  Cory Doctorow (<a href="http://www.eff.org/">EFF</a>)
  <br />
  Ben Laurie (<a href="http://www.apache-ssl.org/ben.html">Apache-SSL</a>)
  <br />
  James Stevens (<a href="http://consume.net/">Consume</a>)
  <br />
  David P. Reed (
  <a href="http://www.reed.com/dprframeweb/dprframe.asp?section=openspec">
    Open Spectrum
  </a>
  )
  <br />
  Schuyler Erle (<a href="http://nocat.net/">NoCat</a>)
  <br />
  Matthew Asham (<a href="http://www.bcwireless.net/">BC Wireless</a>)
  <br />
  Lawrence Lessig (<a href="http://creativecommons.org/">Creative Commons</a>)
  <br />
  Jon Lebkowsky (<a href="http://www.effaustin.org/">EFF-Austin</a>)
  <br />
  Steven Byrnes (<a href="http://www.houstonwireless.org/">Houston Wireless</a>)
  <br />
  Richard MacKinnon (<a href="http://www.rocksteady.com/">Rocksteady</a>)
  <br />
  Duane Groth (<a href="http://www.sydneywireless.com/">Sydney Wireless</a>) */}
</Box>

We have formed the Wireless Commons because a global wireless network is within
our grasp. We will work to define and achieve a wireless commons built using
open spectrum, and able to connect people everywhere. We believe there is value
to an independent and global network which is open to the public. We will break
down commercial, technical, social and political barriers to the commons. The
wireless commons bridges one of the few remaining gaps in universal
communication without interference from middlemen and meddlers.

Humanity is on the verge of a turning point because the Internet has transformed
the way humans relate to one another. All communication can be traced to a human
relationship, whether it’s lovers exchanging instant messages or teenagers
sharing music. The Internet has given us the ability to communicate faster and
more cheaply than ever before in history.

The Internet’s value increases exponentially with the number of people who are
able to participate. In today’s world, communication can take place without the
use of antiquated telecommunications networks. The organizations that control
these networks are limping anachronisms that are constrained by the expense and
physical necessity of using wires to build their networks. Because of this, they
cannot serve the great mass of people who stand to benefit from a wireless
commons. Their interests diverge from ours, and their control over the network
strangles our ability to communicate.

Low-cost wireless networking equipment which can operate in unlicensed bands of
the spectrum has started another revolution. Suddenly, ordinary people have the
means to create a network independent of any physical constraint except
distance. Wireless can travel through walls, across property boundaries and
through a community. Many communities have formed worldwide to help organize
these networks. They are forming the basis for the removal of the traditional
telecommunication networks as an intermediary in human communication.

The challenge facing community networks is the one limiting factor of wireless
communication: distance. The relationships that can be formed across a community
wireless network are limited by their physical reach. Typically these networks
are growing to the size of a city, and growth beyond that point requires
coordination and a strategic vision for community wireless networks as a whole.
Without this coordination, it is hard to see how the worldwide community of
wireless networking groups will ever merge their systems and create a true
alternative to existing telecommunication networks.

There are many barriers to the creation of a global network. So far, the focus
has been on identifying the technical barriers and developing methods to
overcome them. But technical problems are the least of our worries, the
business, political and social issues are the real challenges facing community
networks. Hardware and software vendors need to understand the business
rationale for implementing our technical solutions. Politicians need to
understand our requirements for universal access to open spectrum. The public
needs to understand that the network exists and how to get access. Unless these
problems are identified and addressed, the community wireless movement will
never have influence beyond a local level.

Most importantly, the network needs to be accessible to all and provisioned by
everyone who can provide. By adding enough providers to the network, we can
bridge the physical gaps imposed by the range of our equipment. The network is a
finite resource which is owned and used by the public, as such it needs to be
nurtured by the public. This, by its very nature, is a commons.

Becoming a part of the commons means being more than a consumer. By signing your
name below, you become an active participant in a network that is far more than
the sum of its users. You will strive to solve the social, political and
technical challenges we face. You will provide the resources your community
consumes by co-operating with total strangers to build the network that we all
dream of.
